One thing about rhetoric that constantly surprises me is its ability to reach into so many different places and illuminate so many different things. Rhetoric can teach us about highly specialized discourses as well as common ones, from detailed technical specification to crude memes, from the data visualizations of magnetic resonance imaging to the private journals of history's most famous inventors, from the highest political discourse to the meanest tweet.

Sometimes, rhetoric seems infinitely mutable, a kind of philosophical mercury capable of transmuting one thing into another. It can reveal the fallacious reasoning behind a persuasive slogan, it can "make the weaker argument the stronger," it can de-construct, it can de-naturalize, it can serve as heuristic to produce texts, or as hermeneutic, to interpret them.

It is precisely this shifting quality of rhetoric that I want to discuss today. It is a time when information is everywhere and what counts is not only the ability to access that information but also the ability to make sense of it: to sift, collate, evaluate, and eventually disseminate it further.

In this task, rhetoric is indispensable. But, as I will argue, it comes at a cost. During its long history, rhetoric has evolved an ethical standard it did not at first possess. At one time, it was sophistry, a collection of tricks designed to deceive, and excoriated by Plato in the Gorgias dialogue. In the centuries since then, rhetoric has acquired a moral valence, perhaps  best epitomized by Quintillian's "vir bonum dicendi peritus", the "good man speaking well."

However, it may be that in giving rhetoric this moral valence, we've deprived ourselves and our students of important techniques, and as a result have made ourselves vulnerable to the depredations of those who are bound by no such morality. I am not suggesting that as a discipline we become amoral, but rather that the study of immorality is important. According to the gospel of Matthew, Jesus said to his disciples, "I send you forth as sheep among wolves," and ometimes, I fear, rhetoric has done the same to us.

Today I'll present the key aspects of a neglected rhetorical tradition, one that, in a time of alternative facts, blanket denials, divisive politics, and fake news, is more necessary than ever. This neglected tradition is based in the ancient concept of METIS, or "cunning intelligence. First, I'll define the concept and attempt to draw connections between its key features and core rhetorical concepts. Then, I'd like to demonstrate its explanatory power across a range of media.

As a common noun, metis refers to "a particular kind of intelligence, an informed prudence" (D&V 11). Thus, it is related to the sprawling rhetorical theory of prudentia, and phronesis, the "practical wisdom" (Gadamer) that informs management of both the household and the state. Metis is also closely related to several other  rhetorical concepts, as we shall see, including kairos, copia, and techne.

According to mythology, Metis was a female deity, an Oceanid and daughter of Tethys. It was Metis' cunning that freed Zeus' siblings from his father's belly and won the War of the Titans. Without Metis, Zeus would not be king of the gods. After she saved Zues, Metis became his wife, but when she grew pregnant, Zues swallowed her, took her power for himself, "became pure metis".

Of course, Metis' daughter was more fortunate, and when she was born, Athena "sprang fully formed" from Zeus' brow and took on much of her mother's wisdom and power.

According to Janet Atwill, Metis is "counsel personified", and her singular power, which informed her cunning and her counsel, was the power of metamorphosis. The goddess had the ability to take on any form, becoming in quick succession "a lion, a bull, a fly, a fish, a bird, a flame or flowing water." This power becomes a key feature of the intelligence Metis has come to personify.

The history of metis is long. Detienne and Vernant, the French linguists who published the most authoritative work on the subject, trace its appearance through ten centuries of Greek history, from Homer down to Oppian, in the second century AD.

According to Dettiene and Vernant, there are four essential characteristics of metis that are interrelated related. It becomes apparent that three of these have survived relatively intact in the rhetorical tradition, making the fourth conspicuous by its absence.

The first characteristic of Metis is that it is most useful when the power relationship is asymmetric. In contests when one side greatly outmatches the other, the weaker must employ "methods of a different order whose effect is, precisely, to reverse the natural outcome of the encounter" (13).

In rhetoric this characteristic survives as the concept of "dissoi logoi", or counterveilling arguments, that seek to make "the weaker argument the stronger", and it also forms the basis of Plato's critique of sophistry in the Gorgias dialogue. When outmatched by a greater force, metis turns to other methods than strength to achieve success.

The second characteristic of Metis is its temporal nature. Detienne and Vernant write that it "operates on a shifting terrain, in uncertain and ambiguous situations" (14). It involves foresight, (Prometheus after all, gets his very name from metis), beccause, in order to act with cunning, one must not only fully appreciate the past and live profoundly in the moment, but also be able to see the likely outcome of events in the future.

In rhetoric, this characteristic survives in the concept of kairos, or opportune timing. If kairos is opportunity, then metis is the eye that watches for it. Dettient and Vernant write: "It is metis which, overtaking the kairos, however fleeting it may be, catches it by surprise" (16).

The third characteristic of Metis is polymorphism. Metis is not one and unified, Dettiene and Vernant tell us, but many and variable. Odysseus embodies this as an "expert in tricks of all kinds" (18). Athena and Haephestus teach it to their artisans, who acquire "techne pantoie" or the "art of many facets" (18).

In rhetoric, this characteristic survives in the concept of copia, or, as Erasmus put it more fully: the "twofold abundance of expressions and ideas". Rhetors make use of copia in much the same way artisans do the "art of many facets," to find expedients, poroi, that are hidden.

The final characteristic of metis is its deceitful nature. Metis has a false face. It relies on disguise, camouflage, and dissimulation. The perfect metaphor is the net, the trap, the snare. Metis makes use of illusion, like "the spells of a magician" (22), to befuddle and persuade. It is a trap which "conceals its inner deceit beneath a seductive exterior" (23).

This is the only characteristic of metis without a cognate in the mainstream rhetorical tradition. To the contrary, rhetoric explicitly rejects deceit and duplicity throughout a great swath of rhetorical history, from Plato's Gorgias, to Quintillian's "vir bonum" up until the Neo-Aristotelian concept of Ethos taught in classrooms today, which holds dishonesty as anathema to good rhetoric.

In an article on rhetorical bodies across traditions, Jay Dolmage argues that the rhetorical tradition we've canonized effaces and silences other rhetorical traditions, one of which, he writes, involves metis . Debra Hawee, in her writings on rhetorical embodiment, explains how movements of the body, informed by metis, help constitute rhetoric (48). And Janet Atwill, in Rhetoric Reclaimed, writes of the "neglected tradition" of techne, in which she explicitly includes metis (48).

So, as we can see from our study of its characteristics, much of metis has actually survived intact in mainstream rhetorical tradition. What's been lost, specifically, is the notion of rhetoric as deceit, as a trap, a net, a lure, a snare.

It is precisely this quality that we need to better understand as an academic discipline at a time when communication informed by metis is in widespread use across a variety of media.  In order to illustrate this, I'll turn to some contemporary examples of metis and show how a theory of cunning allows us to better understand them.

One need only glance in the direction of public media to see how rhetorics of deceit have proliferated. And when looking at public media, one need look no further than the office of the President. In this moment, immortalized on the internet, Mr. Trump denounces major institutions of Journalism, such as the New York Times, CNN and others, by calling them "fake news" in response to their negative reporting about his involvement in the Russia case (and other issues).

This example aptly illustrates the first characteristic of metis. Here, with the power of his office checked by the 4th branch, the Press, he is outmatched both by numbers and by facts. In this asymmetric contest, the president cannot simply deny each of the Press' claims, but must use "methods of a different order." Instead of discrediting individual claims, Mr. Trump discredits all of them at a stroke, not only those that have already been made, but also preemptively discredits those to come. Objectively speaking, it's a highly effective tactic.

In this memorable moment, one the President's advisors, Kellyanne Conway, is defending fraudulent claims about the size of the inaugural crowd, and in using the phrase "Alternative Facts" implies that the photographic images showing small crowd size had been fabricated and disseminated by a vast conspiracy of media players attempting to discredit the President.

This illustrates not only the reversal evident in a trap, it also shows the power of transformation. With this turn, Conway transforms the concept of “fact” into mere opinion, as if there are multiple, equivalent, and contradictory facts. Now, when talking about subjective matters, this may indeed be the case, but when it comes to the number of people in the crowd, it is profound dishonesty.

And Metis is not reserved exclusively for speech, as this rather charming piece of chart junk illustrates. Here the artist uses a variety of visual techniques, including emotional content, skewed perspective, and curving baselines, in order to greatly exaggerate the relative differences between the items on the chart.

The visual elements combine to create a powerful illusion that's difficult to perceive. Like the cuttlefish who releases a cloud of ink to become invisible, the visual elements of this chart obscure the reality beneath.

We also see metis evident in emergent genres. Over the past few years there's been a growing movement in field of User-Experience Design to identify and categorize what are being called "Dark Patterns", that is, elements of a user experience that are explicitly  designed to mislead, confuse, trap, or otherwise deceive the user. Examples of this are being collected and categorized at DarkPatterns.Org and you can find hundreds examples under the #darkpatterns hashtag on Twitter.

In this clever example, the designer has laid a very realistic-looking strand of hair across the advertisement, prompting users to try to brush it off. When they do, they trigger a click event and their device takes them to a webpage they never intended to visit. This is the classic bait-and-switch: where something that appears harmless is revealed as something far more sinister.

This is a more complex example of a dark pattern that combines several methods: including misdirection, hidden costs, sneak-into-the-basket, and forced continuity to fool the user into selecting the wrong trial plan.

The pattern works by presenting plan options in a familiar arrangement, with the first pre-selected. But that pre-selected plan is not the free plan we expected, instead it's been swapped with another that includes a continuing subscription. The designers have replaced the free plan with a honey-pot and hidden the link to the true free plan in the upper right-hand corner, where it can be easily missed. Again, the elements of metis: disguise, deceit, and camouflage are used to mislead the user.

And it's not just unscrupulous companies that deploy these tactics. Here's an example from Amazon.com that you yourself might have seen. Similar to the previous example, it hides the Free option in an obscure location.

This becomes apparent when we highlight the likely intended path of the eye through the design.

Starting from the bright blue image, the eye is intended to move up to word "Free" in allcaps, over to another all caps "Free", then down the list items to the very prominent orange-colored Call To Action button, that would trigger an additional purchase.

Only then, can a careful eye discern the fine blue text beneath the image that allows the user to opt out of the additional purchase. It's quite literally in the last place you'd look, and it's wording further discourages users from clicking on it. It says "No thanks, I do not want to save $$$."

It takes significant cognitive processing to arrive at the intended action, and far less cognitive load to simply click the orange button. I'm sure many people followed the path and got their purchases without additional cost, but I'm also sure a great number accidentally clicked the button.

So where does this leave us? Some news outlets have reported that the President is telling lies at a rate that is an order of magnitude greater than any in modern history. These lies enable other, greater lies and perhaps even crimes. In addition, there is actual fake news being systematically disseminated by state actors, and all indications are that this will continue. Some journalists have called it "Information Warfare" and at least one pundit has warned of an immanent "Information Apocalypse" in which our news and information sources will become so overwhelmed they cease to function.

As technical communicators of all kinds, as authors, designers, and above all as teachers, it is our responsibility, even our moral obligation, to understand and counter these rhetorics when we see them.

We should commit ourselves to communication that forcibly eschews dark patterns and deceitful rhetoric.

We need to develop more comprehensive theories regarding rhetorics of deceit. Recently, many of us in UX have begun to study the cognitive biases that people are prone to, using the understandings of modern psychology to enhance the experiences we create, but we should study the science of deception and how those in the fields of psychology, cognitive science, and even law enforcement detect and interpret deceit.

Finally, more than ever, we need to teach our students how to recognize metis when it's being used, and through a process of analysis, how to denaturalize and delegitimize these harmful and destructive methods.

In order to do this, we must ourselves become wise in the ways of metis, including it's full complement of tricks, disguises, deceits, and snares, as distasteful as they might be.

For in the end, as Detienne and Vernant tell us, the world of metis is filled with hunters and tricksters, and the only way to defeat them is to be possessed of metis ourselves. We can only defeat metis when we recognize its ploys of cunning and counter them—for our own sake, for our students' sake, for the sake of rhetoric, and perhaps for the sake of democracy itself. Thank you.
